docs/readme/1.2.5-writing-tests-for-the-update-function.md, before:

### Writing Tests for the update function

As the equality of the type signatures of the classic and **Transit** approaches update functions already suggest: We can use them interchangeably. That means **Transit** can be seamlessly integrated into existing codebases. Let's verify this.

#### Testing State Transitions

We'll make use of the following functions from the `Data.Array` module of the `arrays` package:

<!-- PD_START:purs
inline: true
pick:
  - tag: signature_or_foreign
    name: foldl
    filePath: .spago/p/arrays-7.3.0/src/Data/Array.purs
    prefix: '- '
  - tag: signature_or_foreign
    name: scanl
    filePath: .spago/p/arrays-7.3.0/src/Data/Array.purs
    prefix: '- '
split: true
-->

- `foldl :: forall a b. (b -> a -> b) -> b -> Array a -> b`
- `scanl :: forall a b. (b -> a -> b) -> b -> Array a -> Array b`

<!-- PD_END -->

Now, how can we test the update function? An easy way is to perform a fold over the messages and check if the final state is the expected one:

<!-- PD_START:purs
filePath: test/Examples/SimpleDoor.purs
pick:
  - tag: value
    name: assert1
-->

```purescript
assert1 =
  (foldl update DoorOpen [ Close, Open, Close ])
    `shouldEqual`
      DoorClosed
```

<p align="right"><sup>🗎 <a href="test/Examples/SimpleDoor.purs#L60-L63">test/Examples/SimpleDoor.purs L60-L63</a></sup></p>
<!-- PD_END -->

However, this only checks the final state. We should also check all intermediate states. For this purpose the scanl function is perfectly suited. It works like foldl, but it returns an array of all intermediate states.

<!-- PD_START:purs
filePath: test/Examples/SimpleDoor.purs
pick:
  - tag: value
    name: assert2
-->

```purescript
assert2 =
  (scanl update DoorOpen [ Close, Open, Close ])
    `shouldEqual`
      [ DoorClosed, DoorOpen, DoorClosed ]
```

<p align="right"><sup>🗎 <a href="test/Examples/SimpleDoor.purs#L66-L69">test/Examples/SimpleDoor.purs L66-L69</a></sup></p>
<!-- PD_END -->

Since we want to perform many of these tests, we'll define a convenient helper function `assertWalk` that performs the test and asserts the result:

<!-- PD_START:purs
pick:
  - tag: any
    name: assertWalk
    filePath: test/Examples/Common.purs
-->

```purescript
assertWalk
  :: forall msg state
   . Eq state
  => Show state
  => (state -> msg -> state)
  -> state
  -> Array (msg /\ state)
  -> Aff Unit
assertWalk updateFn initState walk = do
  let
    msgs :: Array msg
    msgs = map fst walk

    expectedStates :: Array state
    expectedStates = map snd walk

    actualStates :: Array state
    actualStates = scanl updateFn initState msgs

  actualStates `shouldEqual` expectedStates
```

<!-- PD_END -->

We can use it like this:

<!-- PD_START:purs
pick:
  - tag: value
    name: assert3
    filePath: test/Examples/SimpleDoor.purs
-->

```purescript
assert3 =
  assertWalk update
    DoorOpen
    [ Close /\ DoorClosed
    , Open /\ DoorOpen
    , Close /\ DoorClosed
    ]
```

<!-- PD_END -->

#### Verifying Interchangeability

Of course we want to check this with both the classic and **Transit** approaches. The following test checks all intermediate states for both approaches.

<!-- PD_START:purs
filePath: test/Examples/SimpleDoor.purs
pick:
  - tag: value
    name: assert4
-->

```purescript
assert4 =
  for_ [ updateClassic, update ]
    \fn ->
      assertWalk fn
        DoorOpen
        [ Close /\ DoorClosed
        , Open /\ DoorOpen
        , Open /\ DoorOpen
        , Close /\ DoorClosed
        , Open /\ DoorOpen
        ]
```

<p align="right"><sup>🗎 <a href="test/Examples/SimpleDoor.purs#L81-L91">test/Examples/SimpleDoor.purs L81-L91</a></sup></p>
<!-- PD_END -->

Commit message:

Refine documentation for testing the update function in the Simple Door state machine. Clarify the interchangeability of classic and Transit approaches, enhance explanations of testing methodologies using `foldl` and `scanl`, and introduce the `assertWalk` helper function for comprehensive state transition verification. This improves the overall clarity and usability of the testing section.

docs/readme/1.2.5-writing-tests-for-the-update-function.md, after:

### Writing Tests for the update function

Since both the classic and **Transit** approaches have the same type signature (`State -> Msg -> State`), they can be used interchangeably. Let's see how to write tests for the update function and verify that both approaches behave identically.

#### Testing State Transitions

To test our update function, we'll use two useful functions from the `Data.Array` module:

<!-- PD_START:purs
inline: true
pick:
  - tag: signature_or_foreign
    name: foldl
    filePath: .spago/p/arrays-7.3.0/src/Data/Array.purs
    prefix: '- '
  - tag: signature_or_foreign
    name: scanl
    filePath: .spago/p/arrays-7.3.0/src/Data/Array.purs
    prefix: '- '
split: true
-->

- `foldl :: forall a b. (b -> a -> b) -> b -> Array a -> b` - Folds over an array, accumulating a result
- `scanl :: forall a b. (b -> a -> b) -> b -> Array a -> Array b` - Like foldl, but returns all intermediate results

<!-- PD_END -->

The simplest way to test the update function is to use `foldl` to apply a sequence of messages and check if the final state matches what we expect:

<!-- PD_START:purs
filePath: test/Examples/SimpleDoor.purs
pick:
  - tag: value
    name: assert1
-->

```purescript
assert1 =
  (foldl update DoorOpen [ Close, Open, Close ])
    `shouldEqual`
      DoorClosed
```

<p align="right"><sup>🗎 <a href="test/Examples/SimpleDoor.purs#L60-L63">test/Examples/SimpleDoor.purs L60-L63</a></sup></p>
<!-- PD_END -->

This test starts with the door open, closes it, opens it, then closes it again. It checks that we end up with the door closed, as expected.

This test only checks the final result. To be more thorough, we should also verify that each step along the way works correctly. The `scanl` function is perfect for this—it shows us all the intermediate states, not just the final one.

<!-- PD_START:purs
filePath: test/Examples/SimpleDoor.purs
pick:
  - tag: value
    name: assert2
-->

```purescript
assert2 =
  (scanl update DoorOpen [ Close, Open, Close ])
    `shouldEqual`
      [ DoorClosed, DoorOpen, DoorClosed ]
```

<p align="right"><sup>🗎 <a href="test/Examples/SimpleDoor.purs#L66-L69">test/Examples/SimpleDoor.purs L66-L69</a></sup></p>
<!-- PD_END -->

This test does the same thing—starts with the door open, closes it, opens it, then closes it again. But instead of just checking the final result, it verifies each step along the way: after closing, the door is closed; after opening, the door is open; and after closing again, the door is closed. This makes sure each transition works correctly.

Since we'll want to write many of these tests, it's helpful to define a reusable helper function. The `assertWalk` function takes an update function, an initial state, and a list of message/state pairs representing the expected walk through the state machine:

<!-- PD_START:purs
pick:
  - tag: any
    name: assertWalk
    filePath: test/Examples/Common.purs
-->

```purescript
assertWalk
  :: forall msg state
   . Eq state
  => Show state
  => (state -> msg -> state)
  -> state
  -> Array (msg /\ state)
  -> Aff Unit
assertWalk updateFn initState walk = do
  let
    msgs :: Array msg
    msgs = map fst walk

    expectedStates :: Array state
    expectedStates = map snd walk

    actualStates :: Array state
    actualStates = scanl updateFn initState msgs

  actualStates `shouldEqual` expectedStates
```

<!-- PD_END -->

The function extracts the messages from the pairs, applies them sequentially using `scanl`, and verifies that the resulting states match the expected ones. Here's how we use it:

<!-- PD_START:purs
pick:
  - tag: value
    name: assert3
    filePath: test/Examples/SimpleDoor.purs
-->

```purescript
assert3 =
  assertWalk update
    DoorOpen
    [ Close /\ DoorClosed
    , Open /\ DoorOpen
    , Close /\ DoorClosed
    ]
```

<!-- PD_END -->

#### Verifying Interchangeability

Since both approaches have identical type signatures, we should verify they produce the same results. The following test runs the same sequence of messages through both `updateClassic` and `update`, checking that all intermediate states match:

<!-- PD_START:purs
filePath: test/Examples/SimpleDoor.purs
pick:
  - tag: value
    name: assert4
-->

```purescript
assert4 =
  for_ [ updateClassic, update ]
    \fn ->
      assertWalk fn
        DoorOpen
        [ Close /\ DoorClosed
        , Open /\ DoorOpen
        , Open /\ DoorOpen
        , Close /\ DoorClosed
        , Open /\ DoorOpen
        ]
```

<p align="right"><sup>🗎 <a href="test/Examples/SimpleDoor.purs#L81-L91">test/Examples/SimpleDoor.purs L81-L91</a></sup></p>
<!-- PD_END -->
