docs/readme/1.2.1-the-state-machine.md, before:

### The State Machine

Here's the state diagram:

#### State Diagram

<picture>
  <source media="(prefers-color-scheme: dark)" srcset="graphs/simple-door-dark.svg">
  <source media="(prefers-color-scheme: light)" srcset="graphs/simple-door-light.svg">
  <img alt="Simple Door state diagram" src="graphs/simple-door-light.svg">
</picture>

#### Transition Table

And here's the corresponding transition table:

<!-- PD_START:raw
filePath: graphs/simple-door.html
--><table><thead><tr><th>From State</th><th /><th>Transition</th><th /><th>To State</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td>DoorOpen</td><td>⟶</td><td>Close</td><td>⟶</td><td>DoorClosed</td></tr></tbody><tbody><tr><td>DoorClosed</td><td>⟶</td><td>Open</td><td>⟶</td><td>DoorOpen</td></tr></tbody></table><!-- PD_END -->

The diagram shows a simple state machine with two states (`DoorOpen` and `DoorClosed`) and two transitions (`Close` and `Open`). The arrows indicate the valid transitions: you can close an open door, and you can open a closed door. The table provides a tabular view of the same information, clearly showing all valid transitions in a structured format. Both the diagram and table are automatically generated from the same **Transit** specification, ensuring they always stay in sync with the code.

Now let's see how we represent this state machine in PureScript code. We start by defining the states and messages as simple data types:

Commit message:

Enhance documentation for the Simple Door state machine by adding detailed descriptions of the state behavior and visual representations. Update the state diagram and transition table sections for clarity, ensuring consistency in the explanation of valid transitions and actions. This improves the overall understanding of the state machine implementation in PureScript.

docs/readme/1.2.1-the-state-machine.md, after:

### The State Machine

Think of a door that can be either open or closed. When it's open, you can close it. When it's closed, you can open it. That's it—no other actions make sense. You can't open a door that's already open, and you can't close a door that's already closed. This simple behavior is what we're modeling here.

Before diving into the code, let's visualize our simple door state machine. This will help you understand the structure we're about to implement.

#### State Diagram

The state diagram below shows all possible states and the valid transitions between them:

<picture>
  <source media="(prefers-color-scheme: dark)" srcset="graphs/simple-door-dark.svg">
  <source media="(prefers-color-scheme: light)" srcset="graphs/simple-door-light.svg">
  <img alt="Simple Door state diagram" src="graphs/simple-door-light.svg">
</picture>

In this diagram, you can see:

- **Two states**: `DoorOpen` and `DoorClosed` (shown as rounded rectangles)
- **Two transitions**: The `Close` transition moves from `DoorOpen` to `DoorClosed`, and the `Open` transition moves from `DoorClosed` to `DoorOpen`
- **Arrows**: The direction of each arrow shows which state changes are valid

#### Transition Table

For a more structured view, here's the corresponding transition table:

<!-- PD_START:raw
filePath: graphs/simple-door.html
--><table><thead><tr><th>From State</th><th /><th>Transition</th><th /><th>To State</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td>DoorOpen</td><td>⟶</td><td>Close</td><td>⟶</td><td>DoorClosed</td></tr></tbody><tbody><tr><td>DoorClosed</td><td>⟶</td><td>Open</td><td>⟶</td><td>DoorOpen</td></tr></tbody></table><!-- PD_END -->

This table provides the same information in a structured format. Each row shows one valid transition: which state you start in, which action you take, and which state you end up in. Notice that invalid actions—like trying to open an already open door—simply don't appear in the table.

Now that we've seen the visual representation, let's see how we represent this state machine in PureScript code. We'll start by defining the states and messages as simple data types:
